---
title: "The Context"
date: 2024-03-20
permalink: /posts/2024/03/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - golang
  - context     
---


## Context

1. context: The main interface that defines the methods available for a context.
It is used to derive new Context instances with aditional properties.

2. Background(): 
    - returns an empty context.
    - It is never canceled.
    - has no values.
    - has no deadline.
    - it is typically used at the top level of an application. 
        - TODO: But why ?, explain with an exmaple
    
3. TODO():
    - returns an empty context.
    - use when dont know which context to use.
    - its a placeholder.

4. WithCancel(parent Context)(ctx Context, cancel CancelFunc):
    - Creates new context that can be canceled.
    - `cancel` is the function that, when called, cancels the context.

5. WithDeadline(parent Context, deadline time.Time)(Context, CancelFunc):
    - Creates new context that is canceled when the deadline expires.

6. WithTimeOut(parent Context, timeout time.Duration)(Context, CancelFunc):
    - Shortcut for `WithDeadline` for specifying a timeout.

7. WithValue(parent Context, key, val interface{})Context:
    - Creates a new context that carries a value. The value can be retrieved with `Value(key)`.
    - What is the usecase ? how / why / when / where to use `Withvalue` context.
        - The `WithValue` function in the context package is used to derive a new context from a parent context. which carries a key-value pair. This can be useful for passing request scoped data that is needed down the call chain, such as request IDs, user information, or tracing information.

        - Use Case:
            - Request-scoped data:
                - For example, you might want to pass a user ID or a request ID through the layers of your application without having to change your function signiture to include *this data*

        - How and Why to Use `WithValue`:
            - Passing data down the call stack:
                - it allows functions that are called deeeeeeeper in the call stack to retrieve values without changing their *signitures*.
            - Tracing and logging:
                - Its often used for passin tracing information that can be used to **correlate**  logs and operation accross different services or parts of an application.

        - When and Where to Use `WithValue`:
            - At the beginning of a request handling:
                - You might attache values to the context at the entry point of handling a request, Such as in the *middleware* of an `HTTP` server.
            - Before calling a goroutine:
                - If you're about to call a goroutine abd you need to have access to certain data, you can pass a context with those values to it.

                ```go
                    type key int

                    const userKey key = 0

                    func handleRequest(req *http.Request) {
                        ctx := context.Background()

                        user := getUserFromRequest(req)

                        ctx = context.WithValue(ctx, userKey, user)

                        processRequest(ctx)
                    }

                    func processRequest(ctx context.Context) {
                        user, ok := ctx.Value(userKey).(UserType)
                        if !ok {
                            // handle the case where the use information is not set or has the wrong type
                        }

                        // use the user information to process the request
                        //...
                    }
                ```
    - Important Considerations:
        - Avoid overuse:
        - Not for passing optional parameters:
        - Values should be immutable:
        - Keys should be unique:
            - To avoid collision, keys should be uniquely defined, often by using a custom type or using *package-level* private types.


### Methods on Context:

1. Deadline() (deadline time.Time, ok bool):
    - Returns the time when the Context will be canceled, if any.
2. Done() <-chan struct{}:
    - Return a channel thats is closed when the Context is canceled or times out.
3. Err() error:
    - Returns an error indicating why the Context was canceled.
4. Value(key interface{})interface{}:
    - Retrieves a value set on the Context with the given kay.
