---
title: "Building REST APIs with Go 1.22's Enhanced http.NewServeMux"
date: 2024-02-27
permalink: /posts/2024/02/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - golang
  - API
  - http
---


## Building REST APIs with Go 1.22's Enhanced `http.NewServeMux`

The release of Go 1.22, the Go programming language introduced significant enhancements to its `net/http` package, particularly to `http.NewServeMux`, making the development of REST APIs more intuitive and powerful. This blog post explores how to leverage these new features in Go 1.22 to build robust REST APIs.

## Introduction to Go 1.22's `http.NewServeMux` Enhancements

Go 1.22 brought two major enhancements to the `net/http` package's router: method matching and wildcards ([Go 1.22 Routing Enhancements](https://go.dev/blog/routing-enhancements)). These features allow developers to define routes using patterns rather than writing extensive Go code to handle different HTTP methods and dynamic URL paths. This simplification leads to cleaner, more maintainable code.

### Method Matching

Prior to Go 1.22, handling different HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.) required additional code within the handler functions to check the method of the incoming request. Go 1.22 introduces method matching directly in the route definition, enabling developers to specify the HTTP method in the pattern string passed to `http.Handle` or `http.HandleFunc`.

### Wildcards

The addition of wildcards to route patterns allows for capturing dynamic segments of the URL path. This is particularly useful for REST APIs where resource identifiers are part of the URL, such as `/todo/{id}`.

## Building a Simple REST API

Let's build a simple REST API for managing a list of todos using Go 1.22's enhanced `http.NewServeMux`.

### Step 1: Define the Todo Model

First, define a simple struct to represent a todo item.

```go
type Todo struct {
	ID   int    `json:"id"`
	Task string `json:"task"`
	Done bool   `json:"done"`
}
```

### Step 2: Define the TodoHandler

```go
type TodoHandler struct {
	sync.Mutex
	todos []Todo
}
```

### Step 3: Implement the ServeHTTP

```go
func (h *TodoHandler) ServeHTTP(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	switch r.Method {
	case http.MethodGet:
		if r.URL.Path == "/todos" {
			h.getTodos(w, r)
		} else if r.URL.Path == "/todo/"+r.PathValue("id") {
			h.getTodo(w, r)
		}
	case http.MethodPost:
		h.addTodod(w, r)
	}
}

```


### Step 4: Implement the Handlers

Implement handler functions for different API endpoints. With Go 1.22, we can directly match HTTP methods and capture URL path segments.

#### Get Todos

```go
func (h *TodoHandler) getTodos(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {

	w.Header().Set("Content-Type", "application/json")
	json.NewEncoder(w).Encode(h.todos)
}
```


#### Get a Single Todo

Using the new wildcard feature, we can capture the todo ID directly from the URL.

```go
func (h *TodoHandler) getTodo(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	id := r.PathValue("id")
	idi, _ := strconv.Atoi(id)
	w.Header().Set("Content-Type", "application/json")
	for _, todo := range h.todos {
		if todo.ID == idi {
			json.NewEncoder(w).Encode(todo)
		}
	}
}
```

#### Add a Todo

```go
func (h *TodoHandler) addTodod(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	h.Lock()
	defer h.Unlock()

	var todo Todo
	if err := json.NewDecoder(r.Body).Decode(&todo); err != nil {
		log.Printf("Error %v", err.Error())
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusBadRequest)
		return
	}

	todo.ID = len(h.todos) + 1
	h.todos = append(h.todos, todo)

	w.WriteHeader(http.StatusCreated)
	json.NewEncoder(w).Encode(todo)
}
```


### Step 5: Register the Handlers

With the method matching and wildcards, registering handlers becomes more straightforward.

```go
func main() {
	mux := http.NewServeMux()

	todoHandle := &TodoHandler{}

	mux.Handle("GET /todos", todoHandle)
	mux.Handle("POST /todo", todoHandle)
	mux.Handle("GET /todo/{id}", todoHandle)

	http.ListenAndServe(":8080", mux)
}
```


## Conclusion

Go 1.22's enhancements to `http.NewServeMux` significantly simplify the process of building REST APIs by introducing method matching and wildcards. These features allow developers to write cleaner, more expressive route definitions, reducing the boilerplate code and making the API more readable. As Go continues to evolve, it solidifies its position as a powerful language for building modern web applications and services.